README.md, before:


<h1 align="center">
Simple Tiling
</span>
<h4 align="center">
<span style="display:inline-flex; align-items:center; gap:12px;">
A lightweight, opinionated, and automatic tiling window manager for GNOME Shell
</span>
<p>

[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

> **Note:** This is a fork and TypeScript refactor of the excellent [Simple Tiling extension by Domoel](https://github.com/Domoel/Simple-Tiling). The original extension provides a solid foundation for automatic tiling in GNOME Shell. This fork adds TypeScript support, maximized window handling, and other enhancements while aiming to maintain the simplicity of the original design.

<img width="2560" height="1440" alt="Simple-Tiling-v6" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/eb0f7cc3-6a5a-4036-8a1e-8f945c52e55c" />

## Introduction

Simple Tiling is a GNOME Shell extension for users who want a clean, predictable, and automatic tiling layout without the complexity of larger, more feature-heavy tiling extensions. Originally created by [Domoel](https://github.com/Domoel), this fork enhances the extension with TypeScript for better maintainability and adds several user-requested features while preserving the core simplicity.

This extension was built from the ground up to be stable and performant on **GNOME Shell 3.38** and now supports modern GNOME shells up to **version 48**.

## What's Different in This Fork

This fork builds upon Domoel's excellent foundation with the following enhancements:

* **TypeScript Refactor:** Complete migration to TypeScript for improved type safety, better IDE support, and easier maintenance
* **Maximized Window Support:** New `respect-maximized-windows` setting that allows maximized windows to remain maximized instead of being forced into the tiling layout
* **Settings-Based Exceptions:** Window exceptions can now be managed through the extension settings GUI in addition to the `exceptions.txt` file
* **Improved Terminology:** Uses "Primary" instead of "Master" throughout for clearer, more inclusive language
* **Enhanced Documentation:** Comprehensive keybinding documentation and clearer layout explanations
* **Dropped legacy GNOME Integration:** This version focuses on modern GNOME versions (3.38 - 48) and does not include legacy GNOME <=3.36 support

## Features

### Layout System

Simple Tiling uses a **Primary-Stack** layout system:

* **Primary Window:** The main window that occupies the left half of your screen. This is typically your main focus window.
* **Stack Windows:** All other windows are arranged in a stack on the right half of the screen using a Fibonacci spiral algorithm for optimal space usage.

```
┌─────────────┬─────────────┐
│             │   Stack 1   │
│             ├─────────────┤
│   Primary   │   Stack 2   │
│   Window    ├──────┬──────┤
│             │Stack │Stack │
│             │  3   │  4   │
└─────────────┴──────┴──────┘
```

* **Automatic Tiling:** Windows are automatically arranged into this primary-stack layout without any manual intervention.
* **Configurable New Window Behavior:** Choose how new windows are added:
  - **As New Primary** (replaces current primary): The new window becomes the primary, pushing the previous primary to the top of the stack
  - **To Stack** (default): New windows are added to the end of the stack, preserving the current primary
* **Tiling Lock:** The layout is strict by default. If you manually move a window with the mouse and drop it in an empty space, it will automatically "snap back" to its designated tile position, preserving the integrity of the layout.
* **Interactive Window Swapping:**
    * **Drag & Drop:** Swap any two windows by simply dragging one and dropping it over the other.
    * **Keyboard Shortcuts:** A full set of keyboard shortcuts allows you to swap the focused window with the primary or with its nearest neighbor in any direction (left, right, up, down).
        * **Swap with Primary:** `Super+Return` - Swap the current window with the primary window (left side)
        * **Directional Swapping:** `Super+Arrow Keys` - Swap with windows in any direction
* **Interactive Window Focus Navigation:** Change the current window focus with a set of customizable keyboard shortcuts in every direction.
    * **Focus Navigation:** `Alt+Arrow Keys` - Move focus to windows in any direction (left, right, up, down)
* **Simple Settings Panel:** A simple settings panel within the gnome extension manager menu to adjust key bindings, window gaps / margins and window behavior.
* **External Exception List:** Use a simple `exceptions.txt` file to list applications (by their `WM_CLASS` or `App ID`) that should be ignored by the tiling manager.
* **Smart Pop-up Handling:** Windows on the exception list, as well as dialogs and other pop-ups, are automatically centered and kept "always on top" for a smooth workflow.
* **Configurable Tiling Window Delays:** Easily configure the tiling window delays if you have race condition issues by editing variables directly in the `extension.js`.

## Requirements

Please note that this extension has been developed for a very specific environment. However, with the latest updates, I have ensured that modern Gnome Shells and Wayland are also supported.

* **GNOME Shell Version:** **3.38 - 48**
* **Session Type:** **X11** (Wayland is still in beta but should be fine!).
* **Monitor Setup:** **Single monitor only.** Multi-monitor support is not yet implemented.

## Installation

#### Recommended:

Use the [GNOME Shell Extensions website](https://extensions.gnome.org/extension/8345/simple-tiling/) to install and enable the latest version.

#### Manual Installation

This extension uses npm scripts for building and installation.

1. **Clone the Source**
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/LucasRoesler/Simple-Tiling.git
   cd Simple-Tiling
   ```

2. **Install dependencies**
   ```bash
   npm install
   ```

3. **Build and install the extension**
   ```bash
   npm run build         # Build the extension
   npm run install:ext   # Install to GNOME Shell
   ```
   
   Or use the convenience command:
   ```bash
   npm run quick         # Build and install in one command
   ```

4. **Enable the extension**
   ```bash
   gnome-extensions enable simple-tiling@lucasroesler
   ```

5. **Reload the shell**
   ```bash
   # X11: Press Alt + F2, type 'r', press Enter
   # Wayland: Log out and log back in
   ```

6. **Other useful commands**
   ```bash
   npm run clean         # Remove build artifacts
   npm run package       # Create distributable ZIP
   npm run reinstall     # Reinstall extension
   npm run uninstall     # Remove extension
   npm run              # Show all available commands
   ```

## Configuration

#### Keyboard Shortcuts

Simple Tiling provides a comprehensive set of keyboard shortcuts for efficient window management:

| Command | Default Shortcut | Description |
|---------|-----------------|-------------|
| **Window Swapping** | | |
| Swap with Primary | `Super+Return` | Swaps the currently focused window with the primary window (left half of screen) |
| Swap Left | `Super+Left` | Swaps the current window with the window to its left |
| Swap Right | `Super+Right` | Swaps the current window with the window to its right |
| Swap Up | `Super+Up` | Swaps the current window with the window above it |
| Swap Down | `Super+Down` | Swaps the current window with the window below it |
| **Focus Navigation** | | |
| Focus Left | `Alt+Left` | Moves focus to the window on the left |
| Focus Right | `Alt+Right` | Moves focus to the window on the right |
| Focus Up | `Alt+Up` | Moves focus to the window above |
| Focus Down | `Alt+Down` | Moves focus to the window below |

**Customizing Shortcuts:**

All keyboard shortcuts can be customized through the Simple Tiling settings panel:
1. Open the **GNOME Extensions** application
2. Find **Simple Tiling** and click on the settings/preferences icon
3. Navigate to the keyboard shortcuts section
4. Click on any shortcut to set a new key combination

Alternatively, you can also modify shortcuts through GNOME Settings:
1. Open **Settings**
2. Navigate to **Keyboard** -> **View and Customize Shortcuts**
3. Scroll down to the **Custom Shortcuts** section at the bottom
4. Find all "Simple Tiling" shortcuts listed there and modify as needed

#### Ignoring Applications (`exceptions.txt`)

To prevent an application from being tiled, you can add its `WM_CLASS` (x11) or `App ID` (Wayland) to the `exceptions.txt` file in the extension's directory.

* Each application's `WM_CLASS` or `App ID` should be on a new line.
* Lines starting with `#` are treated as comments and are ignored.
* The check is case-insensitive.

To find an application's `WM_CLASS`, open a terminal and run the command `xprop WM_CLASS`. Your cursor will turn into a crosshair. Click on the window of the application you want to exclude. To find the `App ID`, Press Alt + F2, type 'lg', and press Enter. In the Looking Glass window, click the "Windows" tab. Click on the desired window to see its details. Find the value for "app id" and add it to a new line below.

An Example of an exceptions.txt can be found in the repo.

Ignored applications will be opened screen centered and kept above all other windows. These applications can be moved across the screen in floating mode.

#### Adjusting inner and/or outer Window Gaps / Margins

You can adjust the window gap margins (inner gaps between windows, outer gaps horizontal as well as vertical) in the Settings panel of Simple Tiling (which can be found in the Gnome Extension Application).

#### Configurable New Window Behavior

This setting controls where newly opened windows are placed in the tiling layout:

* **Stack** (Default): New windows are added to the end of the stack on the right side, keeping your current primary window in place
* **Primary**: New windows become the new primary window on the left, pushing the previous primary to the top of the stack

You can change this behavior in the Simple Tiling settings panel within the GNOME Extensions application.

#### Adjusting Tiling Window Delays

If you have race condition issues between mutter (Gnome WM) and the Simple Tiling extension, you can adjust the window delay settings (both for tiling windows as well as for centered application from the exceptions list) directly in the extensions.js (~/.local/share/gnome-shell/extensions/simple-tiling@lucasroesler/extension.js). You will find the parameter at line 17 & 18. Defaults to "20" for General Tiling Window Delay and "5" for centered Apps on the Exception List.

## Future Development

This extension was built to solve a specific need. However, future enhancements could include:
* Multi-monitor support.
* Additional layout algorithms.
* A more detailed settings panel to configure other options via a GUI.

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the `LICENSE` file for details.

## Credits

* **Original Author:** [Domoel](https://github.com/Domoel) - Creator of the original Simple Tiling extension
* **Fork Maintainer:** [Lucas Roesler](https://github.com/LucasRoesler) - TypeScript refactor and additional features

Special thanks to Domoel for creating and maintaining the original Simple Tiling extension, which provides an excellent foundation for automatic tiling in GNOME Shell.

Commit message:

feat: consolidate window exceptions management with D-Bus window detection
- Remove window-exceptions from GSettings, use only exceptions.txt file
- Add comprehensive exceptions management UI in preferences
  - View and remove current exceptions in expandable list
  - Detect open windows and add to exceptions with one click
  - Manual entry field for custom exceptions
- Implement D-Bus interface for window detection
  - Export GetWindowList method to retrieve open windows
  - Return window title, WM_CLASS, and app ID for each window
- Organize UI with collapsible sections for better usability
- Add refresh button to reload exceptions from file
- Support opening exceptions.txt in external editor
- Track and properly clean up UI rows to prevent duplicates
- Preserve comments when saving exceptions file

This change simplifies exception management by consolidating to a single
file-based approach while providing a more user-friendly interface for
identifying and adding window exceptions.

README.md, after:


<h1 align="center">
Simple Tiling
</span>
<h4 align="center">
<span style="display:inline-flex; align-items:center; gap:12px;">
A lightweight, opinionated, and automatic tiling window manager for GNOME Shell
</span>
<p>

[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

> **Note:** This is a fork and TypeScript refactor of the excellent [Simple Tiling extension by Domoel](https://github.com/Domoel/Simple-Tiling). The original extension provides a solid foundation for automatic tiling in GNOME Shell. This fork adds TypeScript support, maximized window handling, and other enhancements while aiming to maintain the simplicity of the original design.

<img width="2560" height="1440" alt="Simple-Tiling-v6" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/eb0f7cc3-6a5a-4036-8a1e-8f945c52e55c" />

## Introduction

Simple Tiling is a GNOME Shell extension for users who want a clean, predictable, and automatic tiling layout without the complexity of larger, more feature-heavy tiling extensions. Originally created by [Domoel](https://github.com/Domoel), this fork enhances the extension with TypeScript for better maintainability and adds several user-requested features while preserving the core simplicity.

This extension was built from the ground up to be stable and performant on **GNOME Shell 3.38** and now supports modern GNOME shells up to **version 48**.

## What's Different in This Fork

This fork builds upon Domoel's excellent foundation with the following enhancements:

* **TypeScript Refactor:** Complete migration to TypeScript for improved type safety, better IDE support, and easier maintenance
* **Maximized Window Support:** New `respect-maximized-windows` setting that allows maximized windows to remain maximized instead of being forced into the tiling layout
* **Settings-Based Exceptions:** Window exceptions can now be managed through the extension settings GUI in addition to the `exceptions.txt` file
* **Improved Terminology:** Uses "Primary" instead of "Master" throughout for clearer, more inclusive language
* **Enhanced Documentation:** Comprehensive keybinding documentation and clearer layout explanations
* **Dropped legacy GNOME Integration:** This version focuses on modern GNOME versions (3.38 - 48) and does not include legacy GNOME <=3.36 support

## Features

### Layout System

Simple Tiling uses a **Primary-Stack** layout system:

* **Primary Window:** The main window that occupies the left half of your screen. This is typically your main focus window.
* **Stack Windows:** All other windows are arranged in a stack on the right half of the screen using a Fibonacci spiral algorithm for optimal space usage.

```
┌─────────────┬─────────────┐
│             │   Stack 1   │
│             ├─────────────┤
│   Primary   │   Stack 2   │
│   Window    ├──────┬──────┤
│             │Stack │Stack │
│             │  3   │  4   │
└─────────────┴──────┴──────┘
```

* **Automatic Tiling:** Windows are automatically arranged into this primary-stack layout without any manual intervention.
* **Configurable New Window Behavior:** Choose how new windows are added:
  - **As New Primary** (replaces current primary): The new window becomes the primary, pushing the previous primary to the top of the stack
  - **To Stack** (default): New windows are added to the end of the stack, preserving the current primary
* **Tiling Lock:** The layout is strict by default. If you manually move a window with the mouse and drop it in an empty space, it will automatically "snap back" to its designated tile position, preserving the integrity of the layout.
* **Interactive Window Swapping:**
    * **Drag & Drop:** Swap any two windows by simply dragging one and dropping it over the other.
    * **Keyboard Shortcuts:** A full set of keyboard shortcuts allows you to swap the focused window with the primary or with its nearest neighbor in any direction (left, right, up, down).
        * **Swap with Primary:** `Super+Return` - Swap the current window with the primary window (left side)
        * **Directional Swapping:** `Super+Arrow Keys` - Swap with windows in any direction
* **Interactive Window Focus Navigation:** Change the current window focus with a set of customizable keyboard shortcuts in every direction.
    * **Focus Navigation:** `Alt+Arrow Keys` - Move focus to windows in any direction (left, right, up, down)
* **Simple Settings Panel:** A simple settings panel within the gnome extension manager menu to adjust key bindings, window gaps / margins and window behavior.
* **External Exception List:** Use a simple `exceptions.txt` file to list applications (by their `WM_CLASS` or `App ID`) that should be ignored by the tiling manager.
* **Smart Pop-up Handling:** Windows on the exception list, as well as dialogs and other pop-ups, are automatically centered and kept "always on top" for a smooth workflow.
* **Configurable Tiling Window Delays:** Easily configure the tiling window delays if you have race condition issues by editing variables directly in the `extension.js`.

## Requirements

Please note that this extension has been developed for a very specific environment. However, with the latest updates, I have ensured that modern Gnome Shells and Wayland are also supported.

* **GNOME Shell Version:** **3.38 - 48**
* **Session Type:** **X11** (Wayland is still in beta but should be fine!).
* **Monitor Setup:** **Single monitor only.** Multi-monitor support is not yet implemented.

## Installation

#### Recommended:

Use the [GNOME Shell Extensions website](https://extensions.gnome.org/extension/8345/simple-tiling/) to install and enable the latest version.

#### Manual Installation

This extension uses npm scripts for building and installation.

1. **Clone the Source**
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/LucasRoesler/Simple-Tiling.git
   cd Simple-Tiling
   ```

2. **Install dependencies**
   ```bash
   npm install
   ```

3. **Build and install the extension**
   ```bash
   npm run build         # Build the extension
   npm run install:ext   # Install to GNOME Shell
   ```
   
   Or use the convenience command:
   ```bash
   npm run quick         # Build and install in one command
   ```

4. **Enable the extension**
   ```bash
   gnome-extensions enable simple-tiling@lucasroesler
   ```

5. **Reload the shell**
   ```bash
   # X11: Press Alt + F2, type 'r', press Enter
   # Wayland: Log out and log back in
   ```

6. **Other useful commands**
   ```bash
   npm run clean         # Remove build artifacts
   npm run package       # Create distributable ZIP
   npm run reinstall     # Reinstall extension
   npm run uninstall     # Remove extension
   npm run              # Show all available commands
   ```

## Configuration

#### Keyboard Shortcuts

Simple Tiling provides a comprehensive set of keyboard shortcuts for efficient window management:

| Command | Default Shortcut | Description |
|---------|-----------------|-------------|
| **Window Swapping** | | |
| Swap with Primary | `Super+Return` | Swaps the currently focused window with the primary window (left half of screen) |
| Swap Left | `Super+Left` | Swaps the current window with the window to its left |
| Swap Right | `Super+Right` | Swaps the current window with the window to its right |
| Swap Up | `Super+Up` | Swaps the current window with the window above it |
| Swap Down | `Super+Down` | Swaps the current window with the window below it |
| **Focus Navigation** | | |
| Focus Left | `Alt+Left` | Moves focus to the window on the left |
| Focus Right | `Alt+Right` | Moves focus to the window on the right |
| Focus Up | `Alt+Up` | Moves focus to the window above |
| Focus Down | `Alt+Down` | Moves focus to the window below |

**Customizing Shortcuts:**

All keyboard shortcuts can be customized through the Simple Tiling settings panel:
1. Open the **GNOME Extensions** application
2. Find **Simple Tiling** and click on the settings/preferences icon
3. Navigate to the keyboard shortcuts section
4. Click on any shortcut to set a new key combination

Alternatively, you can also modify shortcuts through GNOME Settings:
1. Open **Settings**
2. Navigate to **Keyboard** -> **View and Customize Shortcuts**
3. Scroll down to the **Custom Shortcuts** section at the bottom
4. Find all "Simple Tiling" shortcuts listed there and modify as needed

#### Ignoring Applications (`exceptions.txt`)

To prevent an application from being tiled, you can add its `WM_CLASS` (x11) or `App ID` (Wayland) to the `exceptions.txt` file in the extension's directory.

* Each application's `WM_CLASS` or `App ID` should be on a new line.
* Lines starting with `#` are treated as comments and are ignored.
* The check is case-insensitive.

To find an application's `WM_CLASS`, open a terminal and run the command `xprop WM_CLASS`. Your cursor will turn into a crosshair. Click on the window of the application you want to exclude. To find the `App ID`, Press Alt + F2, type 'lg', and press Enter. In the Looking Glass window, click the "Windows" tab. Click on the desired window to see its details. Find the value for "app id" and add it to a new line below.

An Example of an exceptions.txt can be found in the repo.

Ignored applications will be opened screen centered and kept above all other windows. These applications can be moved across the screen in floating mode.

#### Adjusting inner and/or outer Window Gaps / Margins

You can adjust the window gap margins (inner gaps between windows, outer gaps horizontal as well as vertical) in the Settings panel of Simple Tiling (which can be found in the Gnome Extension Application).

#### Configurable New Window Behavior

This setting controls where newly opened windows are placed in the tiling layout:

* **Stack** (Default): New windows are added to the end of the stack on the right side, keeping your current primary window in place
* **Primary**: New windows become the new primary window on the left, pushing the previous primary to the top of the stack

You can change this behavior in the Simple Tiling settings panel within the GNOME Extensions application.

#### Adjusting Tiling Window Delays

If you have race condition issues between mutter (Gnome WM) and the Simple Tiling extension, you can adjust the window delay settings (both for tiling windows as well as for centered application from the exceptions list) directly in the extensions.js (~/.local/share/gnome-shell/extensions/simple-tiling@lucasroesler/extension.js). You will find the parameter at line 17 & 18. Defaults to "20" for General Tiling Window Delay and "5" for centered Apps on the Exception List.

## References / Inspiration
- https://github.com/flexagoon/focused-window-dbus for how to expose things over dbus
- https://github.com/domferr/tilingshell/tree/main for some more advanced preferences UX

## Future Development

This extension was built to solve a specific need. However, future enhancements could include:
* Multi-monitor support.
* Additional layout algorithms.
* A more detailed settings panel to configure other options via a GUI.

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the `LICENSE` file for details.

## Credits

* **Original Author:** [Domoel](https://github.com/Domoel) - Creator of the original Simple Tiling extension
* **Fork Maintainer:** [Lucas Roesler](https://github.com/LucasRoesler) - TypeScript refactor and additional features

Special thanks to Domoel for creating and maintaining the original Simple Tiling extension, which provides an excellent foundation for automatic tiling in GNOME Shell.
